The Black Death and Its Effects Development of world trade routes rapidly increased the dispersal rate of epidemic diseases. By Roman times the populations of Europe, Asia and North Africa had become a giant breeding ground for disease organisms that originated in domestic livestock. Smallpox reached Rome in the second century CE, killing millions of Roman citizens as the Plague of Antoninus. The animalborne disease with the most profound impact on the course of history in Europe and Asia was bubonic plague. Spread by fleas that pick up the plague bacillus from the fur-bearing mammals that are their normal hosts, plague first appeared in Europe as the Plague of Justinian in 542–543 CE. The most devastating impact of the plague (the Black Death), however, occurred in fourteenthcentury continental Europe where it killed as many as 25 million people. In the British Isles alone, plague killed nearly 1.5 million people (25–40 percent of the total population). The major vector for the major outbreak of plague appears to have been furs brought from lowpopulation-density areas in central Asia with the intensified traffic on trade routes to China in the mid-fourteenth century. One important, often unappreciated, consequence of the fourteenth-century plague was its profound impact on European philosophy and science. The prevailing worldview in Europe prior to the mid-fourteenth century was mythic and symbolic, rooted in an idea of cyclical time, placing far more emphasis on links between human and nonhuman aspects of the world than did the worldviews that arose after the Black Death. When plague arrived and began to have devastating impact on local populations, the knowledge base and techniques of this older philosophical tradition were pressed into service, including prayer, medicine based on sympathetic magic, and scapegoating (e.g., witch burning). None of these methods proved effective, and the lack

of ability to deal with the resulting death and devastation created both widespread panic and subsequent culturewide depression.The impact of massive, inexplicable loss of life on a society cannot be overestimated. Belief in spiritual traditions and ways of understanding how the world works are crushed, leading to a sense of spiritual desolation. The experience of the plague, described by some historians as the “greatest biological-environmental event in history” and the “equivalent of nuclear holocaust” by others, forced western Europe to develop a new way of organizing its perception of reality. Within Christianity the plague led to loss of faith in a benevolent, heedful Creator, leading to persecution and scapegoating of “heretics,” eventually leading to the beginnings of Protestantism and its images of a vengeful, wrathful God. From a more scholarly perspective, response to the plague experience may well have led to the development of an intellectual tradition that separated mind from body, objective from subjective, and human from nature. In turn, this intellectual tradition can be linked to the beginnings of the Renaissance and development of the western European “rationalist” scientific tradition, ultimately generating Cartesian Dualism, the machine model/metaphor as a way of understanding nonhuman life, and the Baconian-Newtonian worldview. Thus, the philosophical and spiritual impact of plague led directly to the “modern” rationalist approach in which experimentation and measurement substituted for observation and experience. This new way of dealing with reality had numerous positive effects. For example, it led to increased sanitation, which reduced background levels of many contagious diseases. This division of reality into separate spheres of mind and matter provided a powerful methodology for the study and understanding of the “outside” world. It was largely inadequate, however, for understanding inner experience, the human mind, and our relationship with the world of our fellow life forms. Thus, although this dualistic view led to improved sanitation, there was no increased understanding of the natural cycle of disease or the evolution of immune responses.

554 berkshire encyclopedia of world history

The Old and the New Worlds The importance of animal diseases in shaping both human history and cultural attitudes toward the environment can be illustrated by comparing the Old World (Eurasia and North Africa) with the New World (North and South America). Many cultures in the Americas developed agriculture, but New World agriculture was based almost exclusively around agronomy, for example, corn, potatoes, squash, and beans, rather than on pastoralism, the herding and domestication of ungulates.The only domestic animals in the Americas were dogs, guinea pigs, guanacos (llama and alpaca), and turkeys. Unlike the domesticated ungulates of the Old World, these New World domesticates were never maintained at high densities, humans did not drink their milk, nor were any of these animals except dogs kept in close proximity to humans, as were livestock in the Old World. Many New World cultures existed at densities comparable to those found in Europe. The Aztec capital of Tenochtitlán may have been one of the largest cities in the world during its heyday, and there is evidence that in central Mexico human populations surpassed the long-term carrying capacity of the land. Similarly, many other New World communities, such as cities of the Mayans, Incas, and the Mound Builder cultures along the Mississippi and Ohio River valleys, lived at densities comparable to those found in European and Asian cultures. Despite high population densities, epidemic (crowd) diseases appear to be virtually nonexistent in these indigenous New World cultures, which is almost certainly attributable to the absence of domestic ungulates that have been the source of most epidemic diseases (other than bubonic plague) in Europe, Asia, and Northern Africa.

Impact of Animal Diseases on the New World One of the greatest ironies of the history of animal diseases is that the absence of nonhuman-derived contagious diseases and associated immune responses in New World humans was almost certainly the major factor in the successful invasion of the New World by Europeans

and their worldview, which had been dramatically reshaped by their own experience with contagious disease only a few centuries earlier. Europeans sometimes occupied large parts of Africa and Asia, but without the decimating impact of introduced contagious diseases, they did not significantly reduce the indigenous human populations of these areas. As a consequence, as the age of colonialism draws to a close, the indigenous peoples of Africa and Asia have been able to regain social and political control of their own lands because they have remained numerically dominant in their homelands. In contrast, in the Americas the introduction of animal diseases into susceptible human populations was much more devastating to indigenous human populations than during the plague in Europe, leading to what has been referred to as the first, or microbial, phase of the European conquest of the Americas. It is estimated that 90– 95 percent of the indigenous human population of the Americas perished from introduced diseases. Contrary to popular mythology, this holocaust did not begin with the “discovery of the Americas” by Columbus in 1492 but was initiated some time earlier by Basque whalers,Viking settlers, and English fishermen who began landing along the Atlantic coast of the Americas hundreds of years before Columbus arrived in the Caribbean and other Spanish explorers (conquistadors) arrived in the New World.There is evidence that some tribes originally living along the Atlantic Ocean retreated inland in an effort to escape epidemics that devastated their populations well before the arrival of Cristóbal Colón at the end of the fifteenth century. Despite the success of supposed conquistadors like Cortez and Pizarro, it was smallpox that really led to the collapse of the Aztec and Inca empires. Cortez’s initial 1519 foray into the Aztec civilization was much less successful than his subsequent 1520 effort after smallpox arrived in Tenochtitlán. By the early seventeenth century, the indigenous population of Mexico had experienced devastation exceeding 90 percent, falling from an estimated 20 million to less than 2 million.The impact of the disease was demoralizing and crushed the ability of the Aztecs to resist Cortez. Similarly, smallpox arrived in Inca

diseases, animal 555

St. Vitus’ Dance territory in 1526, setting up the opportunity for Pizarro’s successful “invasion” in 1531. There are well-documented cases of 90 percent or more of indigenous populations being wiped out by these new contagious diseases that arrived with both Europeans and their symbiotic nonhumans. In one welldocumented example, the Mandans, one of the most elaborate of the Great Plains cultures, suffered mortality of more than 95 percent of their population after arrival of smallpox on a Missouri riverboat in 1837. The introduction of alien diseases had a devastating impact on the indigenous peoples of the Americas. If the deaths of 20 to 40 percent of local populations in Europe as a result of plague caused restructuring and rethinking of the philosophical role of humans in the world, it is difficult to imagine the spiritual, social, and philosophical impact of loss of 90 to 95 percent of a population, as occurred in many indigenous peoples of the Americas. Disease is a major factor in limiting rates of population growth, in fact, populations free of the impact of diseases typically outstrip those subject to disease. Indigenous Americans appeared relatively free of epidemic disease prior to the arrival of Europeans. As a consequence indigenous populations had not evolved any immunity to contagious diseases. They did not lack the ability to produce immune responses, however, the devastation appeared to result from the way in which indigenous populations were exposed to contagion.The major killers of indigenous Americans, smallpox and influenza, were lethal primarily to persons in the age range of 15 to 40 years, hence the most valuable and productive members of a population, both culturally and demographically. These diseases typically arrived in clusters, punctuated by brief interludes of respite. Thus communities might be ravaged by a series of three or four diseases, followed by a period of remission. Then such communities might be hit by another bout with a new disease or set of diseases. This combination of periodicity of events with the plurality of the diseases prevented the ability to evolve immune responses. This pattern generated extreme psychological and spiritual stress. Unable to prevent disease or care for them-

At the height of the Black Death (1348-1350), a medical condition known as “St. Vitus’ Dance” began to emerge in the Rhineland (Germany).The condition purportedly was an offshoot of the dances people did to protect themselves from the plague. The principal symptoms were ceaseless dancing, hysteria and foaming at the mouth; there was no cure. Amidst our people here is come, The madness of the dance. In every town there now are some Who fall upon a trance. It drives them ever night and day, They scarcely stop for breath, Till some have dropped along the way And some are met by death. Source: Sachs, C. (1937). World history of the dance (p. 253). New York: W.W. Norton.

selves or loved ones, abandoned by kin and other tribal members fleeing the epidemic, and in the process often carrying the disease to other peoples and communities, many individuals and communities simply gave up hope. Many engaged in activities that only hastened their deaths, such as sweats followed by immersion in cold water. The inability of their traditional holistic methods of treating diseases to contain these contagions caused them to lose faith in their healers and medicine people and also to abandon traditional spiritual practices and ceremonies. Because the European invaders had developed some immunity to these diseases, many indigenous peoples assumed that European spiritual and philosophical traditions were superior to their own, leading to acceptance and adoption of Christianity and its tenets. The failure of indigenous spiritual traditions, combined with the introduction of new goods and materials, led indigenous peoples to abandon centuries-old traditions of dealing with the natural world, based on respect, connection, and conservation. Some peoples may even have blamed the wildlife and the natural world for the epidemics, because it appears that many indigenous peoples associated disease with wildlife and developed cultural traditions that were assumed to minimize the

556 berkshire encyclopedia of world history

likelihood and impact of disease. For example, the Cherokee assumed that disrespectful treatment of killed deer could lead to crippling illness. Similarly, the Anishnabe (Chippewa, Ojibway) peoples apparently developed the Mediwiwin healing society and related ceremonies in response to diseases they associated with wildlife, but the diseases were more likely the results of pre-Columbian contact with Europeans. Not only humans suffered as a result of the introduction of these diseases. Many natural populations of animals, including deer, caribou, moose, bison, and beaver, on which indigenous peoples depended as sources of food and clothing, also experienced massive die-offs from west of Hudson’s Bay to the Rocky Mountains during the latter part of the eighteenth century.These deaths probably resulted from disease introduced by Europeans through their domestic animals. It is worth noting that these die-offs were primarily among ungulate populations, which would have been most susceptible to the ungulate-borne contagious diseases characteristic of Europe and Asia. New World carnivores, such as wolves and bears, appeared relatively unaffected by these illnesses but suffered as a result of loss of their ungulate food supplies. In addition to the impact of disease, additional damage was inflicted upon natural populations of animals when indigenous people began to destroy animal populations because of apparent antipathy toward animals, who were assumed to have broken their covenants with humans by infecting them with disease.Thus, one ironic consequence of the introduction of nonhuman-derived diseases was the destruction of cultural traditions based on respect for nonhumans. Most, if not all, indigenous cultures of North America had philosophical traditions as a part of which nonhumans were regarded as creator spirits, and the concept of relatedness was based upon ecological relationships. It has been argued that the devastating impact of introduced disease on these cultures caused them to turn on their nonhuman relatives, leading some tribes to be willing to wipe out local populations of beaver, deer, bison, and wolves in order to trade furs for European trade goods and metal.