Political Pan-Africanism In his path-breaking and controversial paper, “The Conservation of Races,” delivered in 1897 at the American Negro Academy, the recent Harvard Ph.D.W. E. B. Du Bois (1868–1963), who later became known as the father of Pan-Africanism, called upon African-Americans to “take their just place in the van of Pan-Negroism” (quoted in Foner 1970, 79). Du Bois called for “race organization,” “race solidarity,” “race unity,” and a spirit of self-help, since “for the development of Negro genius, of Negro literature and art, of Negro spirit, only Negroes bound and welded together, Negroes inspired by one vast ideal, can work out in its fullness the great message we have for humanity” (in Foner 1970, 79). Inspired to a large extent by Alexander Crummell as well as by European nationalist theorists, Du Bois in the late 1890s began his transformation first into a race man (a person primarily concerned with African-American issues in the late 1890s) and eventually into a Pan-Africanist advocate and organizer. The most important early political organizer of PanAfricanism, however, was not Du Bois, but Henry Sylvester Williams (1869–1911), a lawyer from Trinidad resident in London since 1896. He founded a black organization called the African Association on 24 September 1897.

1420 berkshire encyclopedia of world history

Selection from the Charter of the Organization of African Unity (25 May 1963) PURPOSES Article II 1. The Organization shall have the following purposes: a. to promote the unity, and solidarity of the African States; b. to co-ordinate and intensify their co-operation and efforts to achieve a better life for the peoples of Africa; c. to defend their sovereignty, their territorial integrity and independence; d. to eradicate all forms of colonialism from Africa; and e. to promote international co-operation, having due regard to the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 2. To these ends, the Member States shall coordinate and harmonize their general policies, especially in the following fields: a. political and diplomatic co-operation; b. economic co-operation, including transport and communications; c. educational and cultural co-operation; d. health, sanitation, and nutritional co-operation; e. scientific and technical co-operation; and f. co-operation for defense and security. Source: Organization of African Unity: Basic Documents and Resolutions (p. 8). Addis Ababa: The Provisional Secretariat of the Organization of African Unity.

The first documented use of the phrase “Pan African Conference” is found in an 1899 letter by Williams calling for a meeting in 1900. The Pan-African Conference met 23–26 July 1900 in London. Approximately thirty-eight delegates attended

from the United States, the Caribbean, and Africa. The delegates agreed to form a permanent Pan-African Association with headquarters in London and branches overseas, and to hold future meetings. Du Bois was chosen chairman of the Committee on Address, which wrote the “Address to the Nations of the World” adopted at the end of the meeting. The Address contained one of Du Bois’s most famous statements, which later appeared in revised form in his 1903 book, The Souls of Black Folk: “The problem of the twentieth century is the problem of the color line” (in Foner 1970, 125; Du Bois 1961, 23).The main points of the Address were appeals to end racism and economic exploitation and to “give, as soon as practicable, the rights of responsible government to the black colonies of Africa and the West Indies” (in Foner 1970, 126). This 1900 meeting was thus significant as the first PanAfrican gathering, but Sylvester Williams’s tireless efforts did not result in a permanent organization. Williams began to focus on his law career instead of Pan-African organizing, and the people who had promised to follow up on organizing local chapters and the next international conference failed to do so. Consequently,The PanAfrican Association was defunct by 1902, and Williams died in Trinidad in 1911. The practice of convening international Pan-African meetings was revived by Du Bois, who in 1919 organized what he called the First Pan-African Congress (as opposed to conference), which met in Paris at the same time as the post–World War I Peace Conference. The fifty-seven delegates from Africa, the United States, and the West Indies adopted a resolution stating that “the natives of Africa must have the right to participate in the Government as fast as their development permits, in conformity with the principle that the Government exists for the natives, and not the natives for the Government” (quoted in Langley 1979, 740). The 1921 Pan-African Congress was held in three sessions in London, Brussels, and Paris with 113 delegates. Du Bois delivered the presidential address, and the delegates endorsed a “Declaration to the World” that called for

pan-africanism 1421

“local self-government for backward groups” (Padmore 1972, 109). A delegation headed by Du Bois presented a petition to the Mandates Commission of the League of Nations calling for the appointment of “men of Negro descent” to the Commission, and for the formation of an “international institute for the study of the Negro problem” (Padmore 1972, 112). (The “Negro problem” referred to worldwide racial discrimination, including colonialism.) Du Bois was the chief organizer for two more meetings, in 1923 and 1927.The 1923 meeting took place in London and Lisbon. At the London session the resolution adopted demanded that Africans be granted a voice in their government and access to land and resources and that Africa be developed “for the benefit of Africans, and not merely for the profit of Europeans” (Padmore 1972, 118). The 1927 congress, held in New York City, generated no significant new demands. Du Bois wanted to hold the next congress on African soil and proposed Tunis in 1929, but the French colonial government refused permission. The worldwide economic depression and the rise of Fascism and Nazism prevented efforts to hold any more Pan-African meetings between 1927 and 1945.

The Garvey Movement Marcus Garvey (1887–1940), a Jamaican immigrant to the United States, organized and inspired a whole set of Pan-African ideas and activities in the 1920s. His efforts are primarily significant due to his mass appeal, his efforts to stimulate emigration to Africa, and the example he set by forming local chapters of the Universal Negro Improvement Association (an organization he founded in Jamaica in 1914) around the world. In 1918 he founded a paper called Negro World, and he held annual conventions of the UNIA beginning in 1920 that aroused great emotional excitement. His movement influenced some future leaders of Africa and the development of Rastafarianism in Jamaica and the Nation of Islam in the United States. But a steamship line that he started failed, and he was convicted of mail fraud in

1923, served three years in prison, and was deported back to Jamaica. He died in London in 1940.

Ethiopia and Pan-Africanism The Italian Fascist invasion and occupation of Ethiopia between 1935 and 1941 brought unprecedented worldwide attention to the Pan-African symbol of Ethiopia. The biblical Ethiopia, as in Psalms 68:31, continued to be a symbol for the rising hopes for black freedom, but by the late 1890s African-Americans began to gain more specific knowledge about Ethiopia, the country. One stimulus for this increased interest was the Battle of Adwa on 1 March 1896, in which the armies of the Ethiopian emperor Menilek II (1844–1913) overwhelmingly defeated the invading forces of Italy. As the only military resistance that successfully preserved the independence of an African country in the era of European colonialism, this battle was widely reported in the black press and sparked a tremendous worldwide interest in the country. After Adwa, diplomatic and personal contacts increased between Ethiopians and African-Americans, particularly after the young heir to the Ethiopian throne, Ras (Prince) Tafari Makonnen (1892–1975; known after his 1930 accession as Haile Sellassie) sent the first official Ethiopian mission to the United States in 1919. These increased connections may be illustrated by the career of Malaku Bayyan (or Bayen, 1900–1940). Malaku (Ethiopians go by their first name) attended college in Ohio in the 1920s. In 1929 he entered Howard University Medical School, from which he graduated in 1935. He later stated, “My belief in Race Solidarity caused me to select Howard University for my studies, in order that I might have a closer contact with my people” (quoted in Harris 1994, 22). He married an AfricanAmerican who was working at Howard, and he traveled back and forth between Ethiopia and the United States in the 1930s. After the defeat of Haile Selassie’s armies in 1936, the emperor went into exile in England and ordered Malaku “to coordinate the black solidarity movement”

1422 berkshire encyclopedia of world history

in the United States and specifically to take control of the collection of funds for the scattered Ethiopian refugees (Zewde 2002, 206). In 1937 Malaku founded the Ethiopian World Federation and a newspaper, Voice of Ethiopia, whose slogan was “Ethiopia is Stretching Forth Her Hands unto God” (Harris 1994, 130).The paper saw itself as the successor to Garvey’s Negro World, but advocated the use of “black” instead of “Negro” as a term allowing a greater sense of unity among African-Americans, West Indians, Ethiopians, and other Africans. It had a clear Pan-African perspective, stating, “We are out to create a United States of Africa” (Harris 1994, 131).

Pan-Africanism Since World War II Two important supporters of Ethiopia in Britain in the 1930s—George Padmore (1900–1959) and T. Ras Makonnen (1899/1903–197?), a name adopted by George Thomas Nathaniel Griffith in honor of RasTafari Makonnen)—illustrate the Pan-African connections of the Ethiopian and World War II movements. Padmore was born Malcolm Nurse in Trinidad and adopted his new name when he joined the Communist International in the late 1920s, but later rejected the “pretentious claims of doctrinaire Communism” (Padmore 1972, xvi) in favor of African nationalism and Pan-Africanism.” Makonnen was from Guyana but claimed Ethiopian ancestry. He lived in the United States, England, Ghana, and Kenya, and acted through a plethora of personal contacts with people of African descent in the diaspora, using face-to-face lobbying and advocacy in cases of police brutality or colonial injustices, thus exemplifying “practical Pan-Africanism.” Makonnen’s business acumen enabled him to help finance and organize the Pan-African Federation, formed in 1944 by the merger of several groups, including the International African Service Bureau that had been formed in 1937 to support Ethiopia. The Pan-African Federation organized the 1945 Manchester Pan-African Congress and continued into the postwar era, as did Makonnen’s journal, Pan-Africa. The 1945 Pan-African Congress marked a significant

revival of the movement, being the “largest and most representative Pan-African Congress yet convened” (Padmore 1972, 127). Delegates to this congress included some of the leading future political and intellectual leaders of Africa and the Caribbean. At the age of seventy-seven, Du Bois also took an active part in the proceedings. The resolutions of this congress were more radical than any previous ones.They rejected all euphemisms for colonial rule, such as partnership, trusteeship, guardianship, and the mandate system, demanding “autonomy and independence,” and the right of all colonies to be “free from imperialist control, whether political or economic” (Langley 1979, 758, 760). Political Pan-Africanism after 1945 has consisted of the ultimately contradictory movements for national independence and African unity. Culturally, Pan-Africanism has involved a series of conferences of black writers and artists, held periodically since 1956, and the publication of the journal, Presence Africaine. The political movement was led by Kwame Nkrumah (1909–1972), the head of state of independent Ghana, 1957–1966. He sponsored two Pan-African meetings in 1958, the Conference of Independent African States, and the more significant All-African Peoples’ Conference, the latter described as the “true successor” to the series of PanAfrican congresses (Wallerstein 1967, 33). Julius Nyerere (1922–1999), the leader of Tanzania from 1961 to 1985, supported the cause of liberation in southern Africa, playing a significant role in the Liberation Committee of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), formed in 1963, and hosting liberation movements. He also hosted a Pan-African Congress at the University of Dar es Salaam in 1974. This congress was spearheaded by African-American and Caribbean activists who developed a consensus theme of “self-reliance, self-determination and unity of black people throughout the world” (Abdul-Raheem 1996, 7), emphasizing participation by people’s organizations and liberation movements rather than governments.Yet another Pan-African Congress was held in Kampala, Uganda, in April 1994. By that time, the political independence of the continent was essentially complete, and the congress dealt with such

paper 1423

important issues as reparations, economic development, democracy, social problems, science and technology, and the women’s movement. These issues and others reflecting the realities of Africa today show the continuing need for Pan-African based actions.Though there is as yet no United States of Africa, there is a growing recognition among African leaders and thinkers that Africa must unite in some form. At present, there are at least twelve economically based regional groups, such as the Economic Community of West African States, the Common Market for East and Southern Africa, the Economic Community of Central African States, and the Southern African Development Community. Moreover, the OAU has been transforming itself into the African Union during the last few years, and has stated an aim of creating an African Economic Union in the next two decades. Achieving the increased unity needed to deal with internal African problems may be the most significant hurdle of the current Pan-African agenda. Although Africa and the African diaspora have made great progress in the last two centuries, work remains for Pan-Africanists and their supporters in the present and the future. James A. Quirin See also African Union

Further Reading Abdul-Raheem, T. (1996). Pan-Africanism: Politics, economy and social change in the twenty-first century. London: Pluto Press. Ackah, W. B. (1999). Pan-Africanism: Exploring the contradictions. Brookfield, VT: Ashgate. Appiah, K. A., & Gates, H. L., Jr. (Eds.). (1999). Africana: Encyclopedia of the African and African American experience. New York: Basic Civitas Books. Brotz, H. (Ed.). (1992). African-American social and political thought, 1850–1920. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers. Cronon, E. D. (1969). Black Moses: The story of Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association (2nd ed.). Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. Du Bois, W. E. B. (1961). The souls of black folk. Greenwich, CT: Fawcett. (Original work published 1903) Du Bois, W. E. B. (1968). Autobiography. New York: International Publishers. Foner, P. S. (Ed.). (1970). W. E. B. Du Bois speaks: Speeches and addresses, 1890–1919. New York: Pathfinder.

Harris, J. E. (1994). African-American reactions to war in Ethiopia, 1936–1941. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press. Jacobs, S. M. (1981). The African nexus: Black American perspectives on the European partitioning of Africa, 1880–1920. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. Langley, J. A. (Ed.). (1979). Ideologies of liberation in Black Africa, 1856– 1970. London: Rex Collings. Legum. C. (1965). Pan-Africanism: A short political guide (2nd ed.). New York: Frederick Praeger. Lewis, D. L. (1993). W. E. B. Du Bois: Biography of a race, 1868–1919. New York: Henry Holt. Lynch, H. R. (1967). Edward Wilmot Blyden: Pan-Negro patriot, 1832– 1912. London: Oxford University Press. Makonnen, R. (1973). Pan-Africanism from within (K. King, Ed.). Nairobi, Kenya: Oxford University Press. Mathurin, O. C. (1976). Henry Sylvester Williams and the origins of the Pan-African movement, 1869–1911. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. Moses, W. J. (Ed.). (1992). Destiny and race: Selected writings, 1840– 1898, Alexander Crummell. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. Mshomba, R. E. (2000). Africa in the global economy. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner. Nkrumah, K. (1970). Africa must unite. New York: International Publishers. Padmore, G. (1972). Pan-Africanism or communism. Garden City, NJ: Anchor. Quirin, J. A. (in press). African American perceptions of the Battle of Adwa, 1896–l1914. In S. Uhlig (Ed.), Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference of Ethiopian Studies, Hamburg, Germany, 20–25 July 2003. Wiesbaden, Germany: Harrasowitz. Richardson, M. (Ed.). (1987). Maria Stewart: America’s first black woman political writer. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. Shepperson, G. (1960). Notes on Negro American influences on the emergence of African nationalism. Journal of African History, 1, 299–312. Stuckey, S. (1987). Slave culture: Nationalist theory and the foundations of black America. New York: Oxford University Press. Thompson, V. B. (1969). Africa and unity: The evolution of PanAfricanism. New York: Humanities Press. Wallerstein, I. (1967). Africa: The politics of unity. New York: Vintage Books. Zewde, B. (2002). Pioneers of change in Ethiopia: The reformist intellectuals of the early twentieth century. Oxford, UK: James Currey.

Paper aper, a thin, feltlike material made of cellulosic fibers from plants, is widely used around the world for writing, drawing, and wrapping.The English word paper derives from the similar material used by ancient Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans: papyrus.

P

1424 berkshire encyclopedia of world history

Antiquity Predecessors of paper, known by the generic term “tapa,” are found in nearly all cultures in the equatorial zone and are used also for decorating and clothing. They are produced by beating the inner bark of plants such as the paper mulberry, fig, or daphne. In ancient Egypt, papyrus was made accordingly from the pith of the papyrus plant. The oldest papermaking technique—still in use in a few locations in the Himalayas, China, and Southeast Asia— derives from a combination of this pounding technique and felting techniques (felting involves pressing together materials so that they adhere to form a large whole). To make a pulp, plant bark that has been cooked is beaten with a wooden hammer to form a thin fibrous layer that then is dissolved in a vat with water. The papermaker pours the quantity of pulp needed to make one sheet onto a mold consisting of a wooden frame with a fabric or bamboo screen and spreads it with his hand evenly across the screen. The mold is lifted carefully; the water drains off and a sheet of paper forms on the screen.Then the mold is placed in the sun or near a fire to dry. When dry, the sheet easily peels off the screen and, apart from possible smoothing, requires no further treatment. As recent findings of very old paper in Chinese tombs show, paper has been produced in China ever since the

last two centuries BCE. In 105 CE, the court official Cai Lun allegedly invented papermaking from textile waste (that is, rags). This was the birth of paper as we know it today. Chinese papermakers developed a number of specialties, including sizing (making the paper ink-proof), coating, and dyeing. They introduced bamboo as a fiber plant, beating it after cooking it in lye. Paper served for such diverse purposes as writing, drawing, wrapping, clothing, protection from weather, decoration, windows, and even for balloons and kites. Last but not least, paper was used for special currency to be burned in honor of the ancestors.

The Spread of Papermaking Chinese papermaking techniques reached Korea at an early date and in 610 were introduced to Japan, where papermaking was becoming a skilled craft. The ultimate was the production of shifu, paper yarn woven into beautiful fabric. Knowledge of papermaking also spread from China to Central Asia and Tibet, and then on to India. The Arabs, in the course of their eastern expansion, became acquainted with the production of the new writing material near Samarqand, and paper mills were subsequently set up in Baghdad, Damascus, Cairo, and later in Morocco and Spain. Using screens made of reed, the Arabs made thin sheets of rag pulp and coated them on both sides with starch paste, which could be colored. This gave Arab paper its good writing properties and its fine appearance. Arab technique spread into medieval Europe, and European innovations, especially the paper machine (multiplying the production rate), spread throughout the world during the nineteenth century.

European Handmade Paper

The engraving shows a Chinese papermaker at work.

In medieval Italy, papermakers from Genoa, Fabriano, and Amalfi tried to improve on the Arab technique. Their innovations included the use of water power, stamping mills (derived from fulling mills, which shrank and thickened cloth) to pound the rags, molds made of wire, couching (setting the forming paper on a felt to be pressed), the screw paper press, dip sizing with animal glue, and a production process based on division of labor.

paper 1425

Three kinds of paper were produced: writing paper, printing paper (mostly unsized), and cheap wrapping paper, also used for drafts. Printing paper caused the evolution of the graphic arts (woodcut; engravings).Work at the vat normally involved four people: the vatman, who made the sheet using the mold; the couchman, who worked in time with the vatman, placing the sheet on the felt; the layman, who removed the moist sheets from the felt after pressing; and the apprentice, who had to feed pulp to the vat and keep the vat heated. Up to nine reams (4,500 sheets) of paper could be made during a working day averaging 13 to 15 hours. Technical progress continued. In the sixteenth century, hand glazing (polishing) using a glass or stone burnisher was supplemented by the use of the glazing hammer similar to a forging hammer. Toward the end of the seventeenth century a much more efficient tool, the so-called hollander beater, supplemented or even replaced the stamping mill.

Watermarks The watermark, invented in medieval Italy, provides the historian with an unsurpassed dating and authenticating tool. The real watermark, a figure in the paper sheet, is seen by the naked eye. In hand papermaking, it is formed by a curved wire that is sewn onto the screen of the mold; the wire reduces the thickness of the sheet, thus making the figure transparent. Later, after the invention of the paper machine, a roll covered with wire gauze impressed the watermark on the wet paper web. The watermark serves as a papermaker’s trademark. By comparing a watermark with others of a certain date or origin, the paper historian is able to determine age and origin of a document or print. Shadow (countersunk, embossment, intaglio) watermarks are produced on a mold that carries a fine, embossed woven wire, and appear as images, like a black-and-white photograph.

The Advent of Industrial Papermaking From the sixteenth century, paper became more and more important for administrative and commercial purposes, and, as more people were trained in writing and

A European papermaker at work.

reading, for private use, too. The debates of the church reformers and new works of science were widely published by printing on paper, and popular pamphlets, romances, and plays were distributed in print all over Europe. Newspapers, which from the beginning of the seventeenth century had come out with weekly issues, changed during the eighteenth to a daily format, and became—censored by the government in most countries— the sole means of shaping public opinion and spreading news of scientific progress. The ideas of the Enlightenment and of the French Revolution were supported by the development of the print mass media at the end of the eighteenth century. Further developments in printing during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries resulted in a steeply rising demand for paper, especially for new printing grades. This and the tremendous upsurge in papermaking soon led to a serious shortage of raw material and to regulations governing the trade in rags to ensure the local production of paper for administrative purposes. The systematic search for substitute pulping materials met with little immediate success. Already in the eighteenth century, there had been some concentration of handicraft activities in big factories, which still depended on skilled papermakers organized in open guilds. Efforts to step up production and to have many jobs done mechanically culminated in the design and construction of paper machines. A Frenchman, Nicholas-Louis Robert (1761–1828), built the first paper machine using an endless wire screen, patented in 1799. It was further refined in England by Bryan Donkin

1426 berkshire encyclopedia of world history

(1768–1855) and by Henry (1766–1854) and Sealy Fourdrinier (d. 1847). Soon, other types were developed, such as the Dickinson cylinder machine. Fourdrinier-type and cylinder machines gained ground in the nineteenth century and were extended to include a dryer section; the technology steadily improved, leading to considerable increases in production speeds. With the increasing industrialization of papermaking, small operators who were unable or unwilling to pay for machines were forced to survive with piece work or by producing special grades and cardboard, but they were sooner or later compelled to discontinue their activities. The decisive turn in developing the U.S. paper industry was initiated by Joshua Gilpin, who in 1815 brought from England not only the plans of the Dickinson cylinder machine but also Lawrence Greatrake, a leading paper engineer. Special paper machines were successfully built (including the so-called Yankee cylinder machine), and soon the United States led the world in paper production and in per capita paper and board consumption (more than 300 kilograms per year in 1980). The industrialization of papermaking was marked by some definite trends. First, all work sequences previously performed by hand were mechanized, thus steeply raising the demand for energy. Then, efforts were made to obtain rag substitutes on an industrial scale, and appropriate industrial plants were developed. Straw was suggested as a raw material but proved unsuitable because it produced low-quality paper. Only the 1843 discovery that one could use ground wood pulp, followed by the invention of chemical pulp (first patents in 1854), solved this problem. Pulping (the extraction of fibers from wood by mechanical or chemical means) became an industry of its own. Just from its start, two big problems arose: Wood grinding produced fibers of minor quality, prone to decay in a short term, especially if applied together with acid rosin size. Thus, most books and newspaper produced between 1850 and 1980 containing wood pulp are endangered and need conservatory treatment. Because of heavy water and air pollution, chemical pulping plants were—already in the nineteenth century, together with the then newly founded chemical plants

producing synthetic dyestuffs—the first targets of popular ecological movements and legislation. A further stage was marked by the enlargement of the web width (web is the term for the continuous sheet of paper produced in mechanized paper mills), an increase in working speeds, the introduction of electric drive, and the development of machines designed specifically for the production of particular paper and cardboard grades. Web working width grew from 85 centimeters in 1830 to 1,100 centimeters in 1990, while production speeds rose from 3–5 meters per minute in 1820 to more than 2,000 meters per minute in 1995. Consequently, paper prices dropped, leading —starting also in the nineteenth century—to the production of very cheap booklets and magazines intended for a growing literacy of peoples around the world. Alongside the development of printing, new paper grades were created, together with specialized paper such as punch cards, stand-up collars, tube papers, flong (stereotyping paper), pergamyn (parchment imitation), ammunition papers, envelopes, tobacco paper, toilet paper, and so on.The use of new materials (thermomechanical pulp, deinked waste paper, new fillers, process chemicals, and dyes) and new sheet-forming techniques, neutral sizing, greater stress on ecology, and—most effective—automation brought further improvement.

Paper Today Paper consumption grew from medieval times to the end of the eighteenth century by a factor of fifty. Since then, paper and board has become a worldwide, large-scale commodity with exponential growth. Statistics from the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) have led to a forecast of about half a billion tons in 2010, of which about two-fifths will be produced in the fastest growing industrial market, Asia. Technical and commercial changes have led to specialization in certain paper types, development of new paper grades, and new commercial entities and structures brought about by corporate mergers or by company groups with their own raw-material supply and trading organizations. The evolution of new sheet--