Causal Typology Explaining causality is essential for understanding the origin, identity, and composition of various displaced populations, their basic needs, and the ways in which they can be assisted. The principal typology constructed by social scientists consists of five clusters of massive population displacements that differ by their causes: (a) pop-

ulations displaced because of wars, civil wars, and political turmoil; (b) populations displaced by development programs that change land or water use and build major new infrastructure; (c) populations displaced by organized persecution—ethnic, religious, racial; (d) populations displaced by environmental disasters—droughts, famines, floods, desertification, earthquakes, etc.; and (e) population displaced by the disintegration of state or by border changes. While the main causes of population displacements differ, the consequences of displacement upon the affected populations do have important common characteristics: massive loss and destruction of assets, in many cases loss of life; sudden drop in welfare and standards of living; prolonged uprooting, alienation, and unemployment; cultural and identity loss; severe long-term psychological effects, political disempowerment, etc. Almost all such coerced displacements involve human and civil rights infringements. Social research has also concluded that the negative effects are more severe on women than on men and on particularly vulnerable population segments such as children, the elderly, or indigenous groups.

Refugees and Internally Displaced Peoples Using “space” as criterion, a basic typological distinction within displaced populations is based on where relocation takes place immediately after displacement. Regardless of the cause of their displacement, the forcibly displaced people who cross a national border and settle in a different state are defined with the concept of “refugees.” Those who remain within the borders of their state are defined as “internally displaced people.” Thus, the most encompassing umbrella concept is “displaced populations” (as indicated before, a term more precise than “forced migrants”).Within this umbrella concept, the principal politico-legal distinction usually made is between “refugees” and “internally displaced people.” The term “refugee” is sometimes employed loosely in common parlance or in the media to describe all those who have been forced to abandon their place of usual residence. However, international law gives a more precise

566 berkshire encyclopedia of world history

The Trail of Tears Although “Displaced Peoples” is a new concept, it is an old practice.The following extract of text from the U.S. Indian Removal Act of 1830 is an example of one of the most notorious acts of displacement in human history. The act authorized the president to order the transfer of Native American nations in the eastern U.S. to the western territories where land was promised to them “in perpetuity.” The relocation in 1838 came to be known as the “Trail of Tears”—a forced exodus in which many people suffered and died to settle in harsh conditions on land that was again taken from them years later.

The Indian Removal Act of 1830 CHAP. CXLVIII. An Act to provide for an exchange of lands with the Indians residing in any of the states or territories, and for their removal west of the river Mississippi. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America, in Congress assembled, That it shall and may be lawful for the President of the United States to cause so much of any territory belonging to the United States, west

meaning to this term, making a critical distinction between those who cross a border and those who, while displaced, remain in their country. Both groups are displaced people, but only those in the first category are defined as “refugees,” while those in the second are defined as “internally” displaced people.The difference in “labeling” reflects significant differences in terms of their entitlements to international assistance and protection. Refugees often establish “diaspora communities” in the arrival countries and either integrate in those countries or return eventually to their country of origin. Historically, the most broadly accepted definition of “refugees” was given by the U.N. Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees: “the term refugee refers to a person who, owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, or membership of a particular social group or political opinion,

of the river Mississippi, not included in any state or organized territory, and to which the Indian title has been extinguished, as he may judge necessary, to be divided into a suitable number of districts, for the reception of such tribes or nations of Indians as may choose to exchange the lands where they now reside, and remove there; and to cause each of said districts to be so described by natural or artificial marks, as to be easily distinguished from every other. SEC. 2. And be it further enacted, That it shall and may be lawful for the President to exchange any or all of such districts, so to be laid off and described, with any tribe or nation within the limits of any of the states or territories, and with which the United States have existing treaties, for the whole or any part or portion of the territory claimed and occupied by such tribe or nation, within the bounds of any one or more of the states or territories, where the land claimed and occupied by the Indians, is owned by the United States, or the United States are bound to the state within which it lies to extinguish the Indian claim thereto. SEC. 3. And be it further enacted, That in the making of any such exchange or exchanges, it shall and

is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country” (United Nations 1951, article 1). In 1969, in response to the increasingly frequent flows and growing scale of refugees in Africa, the Organization of African Unity adopted a refugee convention with a slightly broader definition: “The term refugee shall apply to every person who, owing to external aggression, occupation, foreign domination or events seriously disturbing public order in either part or the whole of his country of origin or nationality, is compelled to leave his place of habitual residence in order to seek refuge in another place outside his country of origin or nationality” (Organization of African Unity 1969).This description of refugees, which employs two key characteristics—violence and border crossing—as definitional, is restrictive on purpose: it is not open to include either voluntary (economic)

displaced populations, typology of 567

may be lawful for the President solemnly to assure the tribe or nation with which the exchange is made, that the United States will forever secure and guaranty to them, and their heirs or successors, the country so exchanged with them; and if they prefer it, that the United States will cause a patent or grant to be made and executed to them for the same: Provided always, That such lands shall revert to the United States, if the Indians become extinct, or abandon the same. SEC. 4. And be it further enacted, That if, upon any of the lands now occupied by the Indians, and to be exchanged for, there should be such improvements as add value to the land claimed by any individual or individuals of such tribes or nations, it shall and may be lawful for the President to cause such value to be ascertained by appraisement or otherwise, and to cause such ascertained value to be paid to the person or persons rightfully claiming such improvements. And upon the payment of such valuation, the improvements so valued and paid for, shall pass to the United States, and possession shall not afterwards be permitted to any of the same tribe.

this act, it shall and may be lawful for the President to cause such aid and assistance to be furnished to the emigrants as may be necessary and proper to enable them to remove to, and settle in, the country for which they may have exchanged; and also, to give them such aid and assistance as may be necessary for their support and subsistence for the first year after their removal. SEC. 6. And be it further enacted, That it shall and may be lawful for the President to cause such tribe or nation to be protected, at their new residence, against all interruption or disturbance from any other tribe or nation of Indians, or from any other person or persons whatever. SEC. 7. And be it further enacted, That it shall and may be lawful for the President to have the same superintendence and care over any tribe or nation in the country to which they may remove, as contemplated by this act, that he is now authorized to have over them at their present places of residence. Source: U.S. Government.The Indian Removal Act of 1830. Retrieved 28 Jul 2004 from http://www.civics-online.org/library/formatted/texts/indian_act.html

SEC. 5. And be it further enacted, That upon the making of any such exchange as is contemplated by

migrants to other countries or people displaced by planned development projects. The reason is that countries and international organizations that grant special entitlements to refugees are concerned with avoiding confusion, for instance, between a voluntary (economic) migrant and a genuine refugee.

Size of Refugee Flows World history is sadly rich in refugee waves that ebb and flow. Refugee populations result directly from the causes listed earlier under “a” and “c” and sometimes “e” (see above section on causal typology), and therefore their total numbers tend to increase dramatically and suddenly with the eruption of conflicts or the onset of violence and persecution. They decrease with cessation of conflicts and through repatriations. UNHCR data show that during the decade 1993–2002, 75 percent of the

world’s refugees originated from developing countries, while at the same time other developing countries were providing temporary asylum to 69 percent of the global refugee population. A historic peak in recent refugee waves was reached around the middle of that decade, because of events in the Great Lakes region of Africa (causing huge waves of Burundian and Rwandan refugees) and in Southeast Europe (wars in Serbia and in Bosnia and Herzegovina). Conversely, during the second half of the decade, 1998–2002, the global number of refugees fell by 7 percent compared to 1993–2002. At the end of 2002, the refugee population stood at some 10.6 million, consisting, by continents, of: Africa 3.3 million, Asia 4.2 million, Europe 2.3 million, Latin America and Caribbean 40,900; North America 615,000; Oceania 70,100. In 2002, the refugee population decreased by 13 percent compared to 2001. The main

568 berkshire encyclopedia of world history

reason was the return of some 2 million Afghan refugees from Pakistan and Iran. The total refugee returns during 2002 reached about 2.4 million people (UNHCR 2004). Consistent with the definitions mentioned above, these numbers do not include the large displaced populations resulting from causes listed under “b,” “d,” and “e” in the section on causal types. The UNHCR evaluated the decade 1992–2001 as a period when “the situation of refugees has generally improved. Since 1997 global refugee figures have fallen; more refugees have repatriated than were forced to leave their country and new refugee outflow have diminished” (UNHCR 2002, 25–26). It is noteworthy, however, that the same armed conflicts, persecutions, or violence which have caused the refugee waves reflected in the massive numbers given above, have, in reality, displaced also an additional number of people who, although forced to abandon their homes, have remained within the borders of their own country. They are defined as “internally displaced people” and are not included in the numbers of those labeled “refugees,” but their total number is also big, although statistics are not usually available. For them too, as for those recognized as refugees, providing human security, assistance, relief, and reestablishment remains essential and demands humanitarian action.

Types of Internal Population Displacement The world’s recent history registers an important, and growing, new type of displacement. During the last three or four decades of the twentieth century and the first years of the twenty-first century the most massive displacement process has been the cumulative increase in displaced-by-development people, swelling the overall number of internally displaced persons (IDPs).This spectacular overall growth has been termed “the global crisis of internal displacement” (Cohen & Deng 1998, 1). The sheer number of IDPs now exceeds the number of crossborder refugees. Regular statistics are missing because governments do not supply such data; nor are IDPs included in UNHCR statistics.

The most illuminating typology usable within the amorphous IDP category is, again, the one based on causes, with its five causes enumerated above, but in this case applied only to those who relocate internally. Thus, IDPs include people forced to flee violence, war, persecutions, etc., but unable to cross a frontier, and people compelled to move by environmental disasters; and most importantly, IDPs include the vast numbers of people displaced, so to say, by “plans,” i.e., by public-sector and private-sector development projects. Assistance to these internal displacees categories is not included in the formal U.N. mandate to UNHCR, and no other global U.N. agency has been yet established for this purpose. Analysts, public advocates, social scientists, and some institutions have initiated during the 1990s convergent efforts “to establish the internally-displaced people (IDPs) as a discrete humanitarian category” (UNHCR 1999). These efforts are increasingly gaining recognition: the U.N. appointed in 1992 a special Representative of the U.N. Secretary-General on Internally Displaced Persons and scientific research on this category has much expanded.

Agent-Cased Typology and the Role of the State Another modality to typologize population displacements is by the agent of displacement. The purpose of this classification is not to list all historically possible agents, but rather to conceptualize and distinguish the broadest categories of agency primarily relevant to contemporary processes. By that criterion, it is helpful to distinguish between (a) displacements triggered and executed by the state and (b) displacements triggered by nonstate agents. This typology is heuristically fertile because, in the case of category a, it focuses the lens directly upon the state’s own policy, responsibilities, and accountability. Conversely, in the case of category b, this criterion helps illuminate what the state can do when certain nonstate agents (or other states) displace some of the state’s population. This criterion also helps highlight what civil society expects from the state, in either case. State-centricity is one of the legitimate research perspec-

displaced populations, typology of 569

Resettlement in China: The Three Gorges Dam The following is an example of internal displacement for development reasons. It is extracted from a field report on the Three Gorges Dam, to be built across the Chang-jiang (Yangzi) River in China, which is expected to require the resettlement of more than one million people by the time of its projected completion in 2009. Throughout my trip, interviewees expressed a sense of resignation about the inevitability of the Three Gorges Dam project, and a widespread, though by no means unanimous, belief that people’s living standards and general quality of life would decline after resettlement. This feeling is particularly strong among farmers and elderly people. “Four years from now my entire family will have to move away whether we want to go or not,” a woman farmer in Fengjie said, “but we still don’t know where we will rebuild our home. Are we going to live next to our old neighbors and relatives? We don’t know. Are we going to have enough land to farm? No, that I know as clearly as I know the five fingers of my hand.There is no land to farm behind our

tives in such massive population movements as relocation programs, and “seeing like a state” (Scott 1998) is a proven cognitive lens on demographic processes. Complementarily, the perspective of the civil society and the individualized perspectives of displaced people are in turn revealing perspectives on the politics, ethics, contents, and consequences of displacement. Introducing the agent of displacement as a criterion regroups differently the kinds of displacements described earlier. The most frequent kinds of state-initiated displacements are development programs that entail resettlement; politically motivated displacements of ethnic or other minorities, sometimes termed “ethnic cleansing”; dedensification of resource-poor or drought areas that are overpopulated (e.g., the case of Ethiopia); and displacements related to state border changes. In the second category, the nonstate-caused displacements result from either social or natural causes. They are population displacements caused by exploding civil wars; by natural calamities such as floods, volcanic eruptions, or droughts; or by private sector companies. (There are also “mixed”

village. When the time comes, I will refuse to move out of my village.They will have to use police to drag me away if they want me to leave.” In an equally revealing statement, a county-seat physician said that many of his elderly patients confided in him their determination to stay where they are until the flood comes. “These old people have lived on the riverbanks for so long,” he said. “They have built their houses here, cultivated their vegetable gardens on the slopes, opened small shops near the docks, and they have their particular teahouses for talking with their old friends. It will cost them more to move everything than the government will provide in compensation. Above all, they want to be buried in the family graveyard together with generations of ancestors. They are depressed by the economic loss they will suffer and disturbed by the inevitable breakup of the emotional ties they have had with this land.” Source: Wu Ming. (1998). Resettlement problems of the Three Gorges Dam: A field report. Retrieved July 28, 2004 from http://www.irn.org/programs/threeg/resettle.html

situations, such as displacements caused by ethnic or religious persecutions of one group by another, in which the state as well has a hand.) The practical comparative advantage of a typology based on agency is that it facilitates policy recommendations concerning restricting or promoting state intervention.

Types of DevelopmentCaused Displacements Worldwide aggregated data, despite inherent gaps, indicate that the single largest cause accounting for the highest number of displaced people is development—i.e., development projects that require changes in the people’s uses of land and water. Displacements by development projects result from countries’ acute need to build modern industrial infrastructure and transportation, expand power generation, develop irrigated agriculture, implement urban renewal, and enhance social services— schools, drinking water supply systems, and hospitals. These developments require “right of way” and entail land expropriation and attendant dislocation of vast numbers

570 berkshire encyclopedia of world history

of people from their lands, homes, and shops. Political factors and vested interests interfere in such displacements constantly, often “justifying” or amplifying displacements beyond what is objectively necessary. Although such imposed displacements are supposed to be carried out in a planned, respectful of human rights, and controlled manner, they often are ill-planned and underfinanced.They cause enduring adverse economic, cultural, political, and psychological effects, victimizing the affected populations. Not all development-caused displacements are unavoidable and justified by public interest. Some specific displacements could simply be avoided or reduced by optimizing planning. Yet the continuous increase in population densities exacerbates land scarcity. Scientists predict that this type of displacement will continue in the future as a companion of development and one of its painful social pathologies. Most governments do not disclose, or understate, the aggregate statistics of development-caused displacements. Research by the World Bank concluded that during the last two decades of the twentieth century at least 180 million people were displaced worldwide over a decade by development projects in just three economic sectors: urban, transportation, and dam construction. This number would be larger if statistics from other sectors would become available. Since 1948, during India’s short postindependence history of five decades, over 50 million people were displaced by development projects.The World Summit in Johannesburg in 2003 defined compulsory displacements for development reasons as a global problem. Within the large category of development-displaced people, several subcategories can be distinguished by applying additional criteria. Along sectoral criteria, for instance, distinctions can be made mainly between urban sector displacement, agricultural and forest sector displacement, hydropower dam–caused displacement, industrial and mining displacement, and transportation corridor–caused displacement (such as highways, railways, airports, and high-speed train lines). Research has pointed out also the category of conservation-induced population displacement, as when traditional residents
