Here, we’re saying that G is a set and · is a function from G × G into G such that γ1
and γ2 hold in G (with “∀x” meaning “for all x ∈ G”, so G is our universe, as discussed
in Section 0.2). Axiom γ1 is the associative law. Axiom γ2 says that there is an identity
element u, and that for every x, there is an inverse y, such that xy = yx = u. A more
formal discussion of models and axioms will occur in Chapter II.
From the axioms, one proves theorems. For example, the group axioms imply the
cancellation rule. We say: GP ⊢ ∀xyz[x · y = x · z → y = z]. This turnstile symbol “⊢”
is read “proves”.
This formal presentation is definitely not a direct quote from Cayley, who stated his
axioms in English. Rather, it is influenced by the mathematical logic and set theory of
the 1900s. Prior to that, axioms were stated in a natural language (e.g., Greek, English,
etc.), and proofs were just given in “ordinary reasoning”; exactly what a proof is was not
formally analyzed. This is still the case now in most of mathematics. Logical symbols
are frequently used as abbreviations of English words, but most math books assume that
you can recognize a correct proof when you see it, without formal analysis. However,
the Foundations of Mathematics should give a precise definition of what a mathematical
statement is and what a mathematical proof is, as we do in Chapter II, which covers
model theory and proof theory.
This formal analysis makes a clear distinction between syntax and semantics. GP is
viewed as a set of two sentences in predicate logic; this is a formal language with precise
rules of formation (just like computer languages such as C or java or TEX or html). A
formal proof is then a finite sequence of sentences in this formal language obeying some
precisely defined rules of inference – for example, the Modus Ponens rule (see Section
II.10) says that from ϕ → ψ and ϕ you can infer ψ. So, the sentences of predicate logic
and the formal proofs are syntactic objects. Once we have given a precise definition,
it will not be hard to show (see Exercise II.11.11) that there really is a formal proof of
cancellation from the axioms GP
CHAPTER 0. INTRODUCTION 7
Semantics involves meaning, or structures, such as groups. The syntax and semantics
are related by the Completeness Theorem (see Theorem II.12.1), which says that GP ⊢ ϕ
iff ϕ is true in all groups.
After the Completeness Theorem, model theory and proof theory diverge. Proof
theory studies more deeply the structure of formal proofs, whereas model theory emphasizes primarily the semantics – that is, the mathematical structure of the models. For
example, let G be an infinite group. Then G has a subgroup H ⊆ G which is countably
infinite. Also, given any cardinal number κ ≥ |G|, there is a group K ⊇ G of size κ.
Proving these statements is an easy algebra exercises if you know some set theory, which
you will after reading Chapter I.
These statements are part of model theory, not group theory, because they are special cases of the L¨owenheim–Skolem-Tarski Theorem (see Theorems II.16.4 and II.16.5),
which applies to models of arbitrary theories. You can also get H, K to satisfy all the
first-order properties true in G. For example if G is non-abelian, then H, K will be also.
Likewise for other properties, such as “abelian” or “3-divisible” (∀x∃y(yyy = x)). The
proof, along with the definition of “first-order”, is part of model theory (Chapter II),
but the proof uses facts about cardinal numbers from set theory, which brings us to the
third example:
Example 3: Set Theory. For infinite sets, the basic work was done by Cantor in
the 1880s and 1890s, although the idea of sets — especially finite ones, occurred much
earlier. This is our first topic, so you will soon see a lot about uncountable cardinal
numbers. Cantor just worked naively, not axiomatically, although he was aware that
naive reasoning could lead to contradictions. The first axiomatic approach was due to
Zermelo (1908), and was improved later by Fraenkel and von Neumann, leading to the
current system ZFC (see Section I.2), which is now considered to be the “standard”
axioms for set theory.
A philosophical remark: In model theory, every list of sentences in formal logic forms
the axioms for some (maybe uninteresting) axiomatic theory, but informally, there are
two different uses to the word “axioms”: as “statements of faith” and as “definitional
axioms”. The first use is closest to the dictionary definition of an axiom as a “truism”
or a “statement that needs no proof because its truth is obvious”. The second use is
common in algebra, where one speaks of the “axioms” for groups, rings, fields, etc.
Consider our three examples:
Example 1 (Classical Greek view): these are statements of faith — that is, they are
obviously true facts about real physical space, from which one may then derive other
true but non-obvious facts, so that by studying Euclidean geometry, one is studying
the structure of the real world. The intended universe is fixed – it could be thought
of as all geometric objects in the physical universe. Of course, Plato pointed out that
“perfect” lines, triangles, etc. only exist in some abstract idealization of the universe,
but no one doubted that the results of Euclidean geometry could be safely applied to
solve real-world problems.
CHAPTER 0. INTRODUCTION 8
Example 2 (Everyone’s view): these are definitional axioms. The axioms do not
capture any deep “universal truth”; they only serve to define a useful class of structure.
Groups occur naturally in many areas of mathematics, so one might as well encapsulate
their properties and prove theorems about them. Group theory is the study of groups in
general, not one specific group, and the intended domain of discourse is the particular
group under discussion.
This view of Example 2 has never changed since the subject was first studied, but
our view of geometry has evolved. First of all, as Einstein pointed out, the Euclidean
axioms are false in real physical space, and will yield incorrect results when applied to
real-world problems. Furthemore, most modern uses of geometry are not axiomatic. We
define 3-dimensional space as R
3
, and we discuss various metrics (notions of distance) on
it, including the Euclidean metric, which approximately (but not exactly) corresponds to
reality. Thus, in the modern view, geometry is the study of geometries, not one specific
geometry, and the Euclidean axioms have been downgraded to mere definitional axioms
— one way of describing a specific (flat) geometry.
Example 3 (Classical (mid 1900s) view): these are statements of faith. ZFC is the
theory of everything (see Section I.4). Modern mathematics might seem to be a mess
of various axiom systems: groups, rings, fields, geometries, vector spaces, etc., etc. This
is all subsumed within set theory, as we’ll see in Chapter I. So, we postulate once and
for all these ZFC axioms. Then, from these axioms, there are no further assumptions;
we just make definitions and prove theorems. Working in ZFC , we say that a group is
a set G together with a product on it satisfying γ1, γ2. The product operation is really
a function of two variables defined on G, but a function is also a special kind of set —
namely, a set of ordered pairs. If you want to study geometry, you would want to know
that a metric space is a set X, together with some distance function d on it satisfying
some well-known properties. The distances, d(x, y), are real numbers. The real numbers
form the specific set R, constructed within ZFC by a set-theoretic procedure which we
shall describe later (see Definition I.15.4).
We study set theory first because it is the foundation of everything. Also, the discussion will produce some technical results on infinite cardinalities which are useful in
a number of the more abstract areas of mathematics. In particular, these results are
needed for the model theory in Chapter II; they are also important in analysis and
topology and algebra, as you will see from various exercises in this book. In Chapter I,
we shall state the axioms precisely, but the proofs will be informal, as they are in most
math texts. When we get to Chapter II, we shall look at formal proofs from various
axiom systems, and GP and ZFC will be interesting specific examples.
The ZFC axioms are listed in Section I.2. The list is rather long, but by the end of
Chapter I, you should understand the meaning of each axiom and why it is important.
Chapter I will also make some brief remarks on the interrelationships between the axioms; further details on this are covered in texts in set theory, such as [18, 20]. These
interrelationships are not so simple, since ZFC does not settle everything of interest.
Most notably, ZFC doesn’t determine the truth of the Continuum Hypotheses, CH .
CHAPTER 0. INTRODUCTION 9
This is the assertion that every uncountable subset of R has the same size as R.
Example 3 (Modern view): these are definitional axioms. Set theory is the study of
models of ZFC. There are, for example, models in which 2ℵ0 = ℵ5; this means that there
are exactly four infinite cardinalities, called ℵ1, ℵ2, ℵ3, ℵ4, strictly between countable and
the size of R. By the end of Chapter I, you will understand exactly what CH and ℵn
mean, but the models will only be hinted at.
Chapter III covers recursion theory, or the theory of algorithms and computability.
Since most people have used a computer, the informal notion of algorithm is well-known
to the general public. The following sets are clearly decidable, in that you can write
a program which tests for them in your favorite programming language (assuming this
language is something reasonable, like C or java or python):
1. The set of primes.
2. The set of axioms of ZFC .
3. The set of valid C programs.
That is, if you are not concerned with efficiency, you can easily write a program which
inputs a number or symbolic expression and tells you whether or not it’s a member of
one of these sets. For (1), you input an integer x > 1 and check to see if it is divisible
by any of the integers y with x > y > 1. For (2), you input a finite symbolic expression
and see if it is among the axiom types listed in Section I.2. Task (3) is somewhat harder,
and you would have to refer to the C manual for the precise definition of the language,
but a C compiler accomplishes task (3), among many other things.
Deeper results involve proving that certain sets which are not decidable, such as the
following:
4. The set of C programs which halt (say, with all values of their input).
5. {ϕ : ZFC ⊢ ϕ}.
That is, there is no program which reads a sentences ϕ in the language of set theory and
tells you whether or not ZFC ⊢ ϕ. Informally, “mathematical truth is not decidable”.
Certainly, results of this form are relevant to the foundations of mathematics. Chapter III
will also be an introduction to understanding the meaning of some more advanced results
along this line, which are not proved in this book. Such results are relevant to many areas
of mathematics. For example, {ϕ : GP ⊢ ϕ} is not decidable, whereas {ϕ : AGP ⊢ ϕ}
is decidable, where AGP is the axioms for abelian groups. The proofs involve a lot of
group theory. Likewise, the solvability of diophantine equations (algebraic equations over
Z) is undecidable; this proof involves a lot of number theory. Also, in topology, simple
connectivity is undecidable. That is, there’s no algorithm which inputs a polyhedron
(presented, for example, as a finite simplicial complex) and tells you whether or not it’s
simply connected. This proof involves some elementary facts about the fundamental
group in topology, plus the knowledge that the word problem for groups is undecidable.
This book only touches on the basics of recursion theory, but we shall give a precise
definition of “decidable” and explain its relevance to set theory and model theory.